---
layout: post
title: Setting Up a Virtual Environment in Python
date: 2024-08-29
description: How to set up a stable venv in python
tags: python, dev-tools
categories: etc
giscus_comments: false
related_posts: false
---

Nowadays, there are so many stable ways to program with Python;
you can use either use cloud services (such as [colab](https://colab.research.google.com/) or [jupyter notebook](https://jupyter.org/)) or you can simply install python globally into your local machine.

But, when you're dealing with bunch of different Python projects, it is critical to be careful with the package dependencies.
In order to address such issue, virtual environment is used and it boosts up the stability.
Virtual environment allows you to create multiple separate Python environments into your local machine and this enables you to install separate Python packages (or libraries) per virtual environment.

As far as I know, there are two popular ways to manage virtual environment, which are [`anaconda`](https://docs.anaconda.com/) (or so called `conda`) and Python's [`venv`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html).
You can take a look at those two and choose as your preference.
The `venv` which is a Python-provided way is capable of managing packages with light-weight but it cannot manage multiple environments with multiple Python versions.
Since using the `venv` is much easier and simple than the `conda`, this post will be dealing with the `venv` only.
For more information about how to setup a `conda` environment, take look at the [this post](https://3seoksw.github.io/blog/2024/conda/).

---

### Python's `venv`

Fist off, let's create a directory for virtual environments under home directory.

```zsh
mkdir ~/venvs
```

Then you can create a new virtual environment into the `~/venvs` directory by running the following command:

```zsh
python -m venv ~/venvs/<your-venv>
```

And to activate the created virtual environment, run the following commands and verify whether it has been activated.

```zsh
source ~/venvs/<your-venv>/bin/activate
which python
```

By running the `which` command, you will be able to see something like `~/venvs/<your-venv>/bin/python`.
If you are not able to see such result, make sure the venv is actually created.

You can simple deactivate the `venv` by running

```zsh
deactivate
```

### Installing Packages

Now that we create and activated the `venv`, we're ready to install Python packages.
Of course, you can simply run `pip install` but if the packages required for the project are too many, the dependencies between packages matter.
There it is much easier to manage packages with file.

Create a simple text file (_e.g._ `requirements.in`) containing the packages you need as such:

```
numpy
pandas
pip-tools
```

I will be using [`pip-tools`](https://github.com/jazzband/pip-tools/) so run the following command to install `pip-tools`.

```zsh
pip install pip-tools
```

Now, by using the `pip-tools`, you will be able to regenerate `requirements.txt` which contains each package's version dependencies automatically.
After that, you will be able to see that `requirements.txt` file is containing packages with versions.
And, you can install the packages with ease by running the following!

```zsh
pip-compile --output-file=requirements.txt requirements.in
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

If you would like to add new package(s) to your `venv`, you can add package(s) into `requirements.in` file and upgrade the dependencies.

```zsh
pip-compile --output-file=requirements.dev.txt requirements.dev.in --upgrade
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
